Okay, we're talking to Professor Gates at Harvard.
I'll put this here.
You quote in the New York Times, we've made a canon.
Tell me about that, about making a canon.
I mean, I know the spirit within which it was expressed, but maybe we can add it at that level.
Well, there are, by the best counts, approximately 150, 160 anthologies of African American literature.
published since 1845 when Les Senelles was published in New Orleans in French.
And each anthology, like each syllabus, per course defines a canon.
You might not like it.
The person might be aware of what their principles of selection are.
Most have some sort of apologia at the beginning
You know, they cop a plea to explain why people aren't there and why people are there.
But no matter how rudimentary the effort is, it still constitutes a canon.
And none has ever been comprehensive enough, large enough,
having the sweep, the range, the depth, to establish a full canon of 250 years of writing of African Americans in English.
And what do I mean by a full canon?
Because of page limitations, we always had to leave out or include things just to show diversity within the tradition.
I call it the Sears and Roebuck approach.
a little this, a little that, a little this to show almost, it's like a museum, specimens in a museum.
And not to think of a coherent logic, a flow, that connects the writings of Phyllis Wheatley in 1773 with Toni Morrison in 1993, the year that she got the Nobel Prize.
There are very few companies.
Thank you.
There are very few publishers that
Market anthology, it's that big.
Oxford's one.
Norton, obviously, is the Rolls Royster.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
So I've been raised on Norton anthologies like every other student, and I figured that we needed, if they were the anthology company, we needed to have a Norton anthology.
And it took two years to persuade them to do it, all these marketing studies.
And then once they were persuaded, I decided I wouldn't do it by myself or with one other person, that I would
make it a real event by getting some of the greatest scholars in the African American tradition, writing today, to be my partners.
And I did that, and it became a cooperative effort.
Often I felt like Duke Ellington orchestrating Billy Strayhorn and Johnny Hodges and all of his other great musicians.
And so we have, for the first time, established
A canon.
And an arguable canon as well, I think, is important.
Sure.
I mean, people will take it on.
People say, why?
Already people are writing to us.
There's a two-page letter I've sent a copy of from a scholar to one of the period editors saying, you got it wrong, and people have written, you made a mistake, you've done this.
And that's great.
And then there'll be another generation that'll publish...
another, you know, I'm sure several anthologies about it.
Oh, I wouldn't be a bit surprised if Professor Gates does the second edition of this in about eight or nine or ten years.
And I think Norton at this point, given the sales figures, would like me to do other anthologies, and I do want to do other anthologies.
We can talk about that.
But by canon, I mean what is the... A canon is to a tradition like
Canon is the marrow of tradition.
The marrow.
The marrow of the bone.
Whether they come to transcribe.
Sure, I understand.
It is the heart, the meat, the essence.
What are the best?
What is the internal logic around which a tradition unfolded?
It's not, on the one hand, inappropriate to say that a tradition is defined in this essentialist way.
It's just everything that anybody black wrote.
And that's what the definition of African-American literature is.
What's American literature?
Anything in American room.
What's English literature?
Anything in Englishman room.
What's women's literature?
Anything in woman room.
But when you're trying to establish it as a tradition with a canon, what are the touchstones?
My feet are wet.
I'm sitting here.
I had to dry my socks.
My shoes are drying over there because they got soaking wet.
What are the touchstones of the tradition?
What are the sublime specimens?
What are the artifacts that utilize form and content in new, expressive, meaningful, pivotal, salient ways?
There's a difference between Terry McMillan, whom I love, as a person I love reading,
But she doesn't have Tony Lawrence.
And if you can't, there's a difference between Terry McMillan and Tony Morrison.
And if you can't tell the difference, you shouldn't be a professor of literature.
What the Norton Anthology is, is an attempt to draw a line between Phyllis Wheaton and Tony Morrison and explain, no matter how meandering that line is, how the two things are connected formally, internally, by language use.
That's what we've done in this.
Not by ideology, not by gender, not by region, but how do the texts speak to each other?
A key word is formal, because it is the formalization of a body of work, which now actually enables it, allows it to be taught in a formal setting.
You got it.
Now any teacher anywhere can teach African-American reading.
You can't say, well, there's no book, so we don't have the stop books.
What text are we reading?
You know, I think the fact that...
African American studies at all of your major institutions, though, does speak eloquently to the work.
How about leaving people out?
I mean, were there people that you left out for prioritizing?
Are there people that— No, first of all, there were people we had to leave out because of Wright's.
I mentioned them.
That I understand, the copyrights.
Sure.
Jay Wright didn't want his poetry in a Norton anthology.
because he felt that he was burned by the company once.
An unfortunate attitude.
It was.
It was unfortunate.
The estate of Zorny L. Hurston wouldn't let Their Eyes Are Watching God be reprinted.
They sell a couple hundred thousand copies a year.
Why have I had it?
I have to think all these things add to sales, but
I don't want to get into that.
As I do, too.
Right.
And, of course, the Library of America is another canon.
Sure.
And the character represented in both.
It's great.
I would think it's spectacular.
It's spectacular.
Martin Delaney, the father of black nationalism, was left out.
He'll be in the next edition.
An oversight or just a regrettable omission, I guess?
Regrettable omission.
The period editor didn't feel that he had
enough room to put him in, but he needs to be there.
I mean, he's of great historical importance, so he has to be there.
So we'll put him in.
And if we had thought about it, which we didn't, Nellie and I could have put him in at the last minute.
I mean, we had final say.
It was ours, really.
You know, as Norton says, a book is a living thing.
Right.
And Norton's are living books.
And plus, what, 150,000 of this already in print?
50,000.
So you're 50,000.
Yeah.
I mean, 30,000 sold between December 9th
And December 24th.
That's right.
I have a first edition that I'm going to ask you to sign before we go.
Oh, great.
We call this the Mothership.
This is the Mothership of the Black Tradition.
That's great.
And there's a CD-ROM that goes with it, which is... Yeah.
That CD-ROM, that was my idea.
And that was one of the... I think that is a major innovation.
This is the classic case of the margins.
in forming the shape of the center.
All literature has a vernacular base.
All literary traditions started on a vernacular base, whether it was English literature or Greek literature or Latin literature.
And African American is no different.
It's just that our oral tradition is so lively and still very much with us as anyone who goes to a theater in a black neighborhood or a black barbershop or beauty parlor understands.
And that tradition surrounds
the written tradition like a Mobius strip.
And so we decided, we persuaded Norton to try to mark it.
At the time, it was a cassette.
We were going to put the oral tradition on a cassette.
And then it became, it took us so long to do it, it became a CD.
It was much better.
Well, it gives you a visual element as well.
We got it.
And people love this thing.
And it will be so useful in teaching literature that I think it will transform...
the way all literature is marketed and taught.
I think all Nortons now will have a CD.
Now, that's a case of the margins and forming the center, which is wonderful.
And this new book of mine is going to conclude with a chapter on books of the 21st century.
And this is, I think, a very meaningful way, the technology.
We talk about the printed book and all that, and we don't have time to get into that here.
But one works as an adjunct to the other.
Right.
So we're canon makers, to paraphrase Justin Jackson, not canon breakers.
That's great.
And what's ironic is, if you're in an emergent field, like we are, we're still trying to establish African American literature as canonical, as a subject worthy to be taught.
And all that's in quotation marks, of course.
So the luxury that our colleagues, our peers, and other areas of literary criticism...
can't assume in trashing the canon, because they've had a canon for a century, is something we can't assume.
You know, there hasn't been an officially defined, established canon of African American literature.
If you had three students applying to Harvard in the English department, and I said, what did you study?
They said, I took an African American literature course.
I can't presume what they've studied.
I can now.
I mean, I will be able to assume.
It could be anything.
It could be whatever the teacher thought, which is fine in terms of individual freedom, but there's got to be a sort of baseline of knowledge.
And I think that one of the most pleasant aspects about the response to our anthology is that very few people left Writers Center, Marxists, black nationalists, feminists, whatever, have major complaints about this anthology.
I mean, they don't see it as being this ideological attack on one sub-school or
blah, blah, blah.
They think it's fair and reasonable.
And I'm very conservative when it comes to aesthetics.
And the fact that we could say things like, this text is better than this text, more complex, and not be challenged is refreshing.
No one really has a problem with that.
So far.
I'd like, if possible, to get a few questions in on, because we're pressed for time, this week.
this matter of the canon, the canon wars that are going on.
Sure.
Shakespeare not being tied... Not being required at Georgetown or Amherst College.
I think it's ridiculous.
I think Shakespeare should be required.
In English, if you're going to be a major in English literature, I'm not saying you have to study Shakespeare.
My undergraduate degree, by the way, Peter Gomes and I were classmates at Bates.
Oh, really?
I haven't seen him since I graduated.
He got an undergraduate degree this year, which I nominated him for, and he nominated me for one two years ago.
There you go.
That was great.
You were talking about, you think it's ridiculous about what?
Yeah.
Right after Georgetown did it, we had a meeting in the English department, and we
It just so happens we were deciding on the shape of the major, and we reaffirmed that there would be certain requirements, and one of those very few requirements was Shakespeare.
I mean, Shakespeare is the man.
That's the way it is.
How can you not study Shakespeare and be educated in the field of English?
Of English literature.
English liturgy for sex.
And then, of course, one of the arguments that made is, and this is a question for you,
Well, literature has to be relevant.
I think this is a question that you hear, a complaint.
Do you believe that literature has to be relevant?
Absolutely not.
All literature is relevant is probably the answer.
Sure.
I mean, you don't study literature.
I'll give you an example.
Robert Penn Warren used to tell his students at Yale, creative writing students, he used to ask them to go around.
It was a little tiny seminar.
You know, you had to fight like hell to get in and submit a writing sample.
And he would say, why are you taking this course?
And people would say all kinds of bullshit.
I want to write the great American novel.
I'm going to do this.
And he'd listen to all this garbage.
And then he'd say, you know what?
This is fine.
I'm glad that you all told me why you're taking this course.
Now I'm going to tell you why I'm teaching this course.
I'm teaching this course to teach you how to get a character into a taxi at the beginning of the story and out of the taxi at the end.
Now to me,
What the study of literature is about is an attempt to, and not to free the wretched of the earth, not to save all the black people who live in the inner city.
As noble and as wonderful as those goals are, there are a lot of other disciplines where you can do that more directly or learn the skills and learn to manage the tools that might possibly inform that outcome much more directly than do the study of literature.
I teach English, African-American literature,
to try to help students to understand the formal, through the formal analysis, why when you were 12 years old you stayed up all night long under a blanket with a flashlight, reading until your mother caught you and made to go to sleep.
You know, how can a jumble of words produce the illusion of worlds and travel and human beings and passion and feeling?
That's what literature, first and foremost, is all about.
It's all illusion.
How do those techniques and tricks of illusion work?
And then how does this text, full of those techniques, speak to another text?
What's it responding to?
It's responding on the one hand to the world around it, to certain specific political, social, historical conditions.
It's also responding amazingly enough to other texts.
It is revising other texts.
It is speaking to other texts.
It is critiquing other texts that have represented similar
experiences, that's wonderful, that's great, and that is what I was trying to do, and that's what I think the study of literature should be all about.
Now, there are many people who think it should be about a lot more, and they're entitled to their opinion, but no matter what you do with the text, no matter where a reading goes, an interpretation goes, to me you have to start with the fact that literature is comprised of language, that it is
formal use of language, and you have to teach your students how to analyze that language use.
After that, blast off wherever you want.
It's only when a teacher sees a text as transparent that the language is somehow not there, that these techniques are not there, that it just contains content.
Toni Morrison wanted people to reduce Beloved to its content.
She would have written an essay about
the woman who killed her children and Margaret, whatever her last name is.
I can't remember her name right here.
But she did.
And she wrote this amazingly complex story.
And that's what I want students to understand about African American literature.
It's not about being black merely, quote unquote.
People could write essays all day long about being black, and they do.
It is about formal languages, rendering...
great themes like love and death, as well as human suffering, racism, the fight against racism, etc.
And that's quite marvelous.
This position must get you some praise and heat from your colleagues.
It is a rather conservative position.
Yeah, but I've been saying it so long.
I mean, everybody knows that.
I mean, I'm not some Neanderthal that I don't want there to be an African-American tradition.
I do.
I mean, some people would say, Hilton Kramer wrote an essay saying African-Americans, I mean, in the New Criterion last month, saying it's just bullshit.
Saying what's bullshit?
African-American studies.
Just the whole field is bullshit.
He said that.
Yeah, you should read it.
It's an attack on the New York Times article about us here.
I thought that was a pretty nice piece.
It was a wonderful piece.
I want to talk to Nellie as well, by the way.
Oh, good.
You can also call me on Monday.
Or next week.
That would be good.
Yeah.
I know we're running short on time.
Now, I feel terrible about this.
Let's worry.
But we could do it on the phone.
The important thing is we've met
Yeah, call me on Monday.
Okay, but I do want to— When we go out, we'll make an appointment with Joe, and now— Okay.
Because I like talking to you.
Well, there's some areas we've got to get into, and it'll be fun, too.
Sure.
But you've got fifteen minutes.
We're all right.
Oh, we do.
Good.
Okay, well, I think that you say in the book, which is very important, having written about Dorothy West and familiar with the Harlem Renaissance theory, I guess
You feel that we are really in a golden age.
Yeah.
Right down.
I mean, that was the renaissance.
This is the golden age.
That's right.
That's true.
Give me a comment on that.
Well, in terms of quantity and quality, we are... I think quality.
Quality.
We are experiencing... It's right out there.
An outburst of tremendous creativity and it's self-conscious.
Across the board.
Walter Mosley, for instance, is as good a...
Yes, a detective writer as there is going.
You've got a Toni Morrison, but Toni Morrison is a Walter Morley.
That's true.
And by... I forgot what I was going to say.
I'm sorry.
No, no, no, no, it's okay.
It's a conversation.
We are experiencing it.
It's quantity and quality.
Well, in part it's... I think someone said that more books by black authors were published last February, Black History Month,
than in the whole of the Harlem Renaissance.
Harlem Renaissance involved 50 people.
50 people.
Max, if you count even the minor people.
And now we have three and four black authors on the New York Times best-selling list.
I mean, it's unheard of.
Routinely.
And part of it is the growing size of the black middle class, which is quadrupled since today Dr. King is still, doubling in the 80s alone.
And the fact that 25 years ago, historically white institutions, such as Harvard and Yale, decided to integrate by race and gender.
And now many of us who are beneficiaries of those affirmative action moves are now professors at those institutions and have integrated comparable institutions within the society.
In 1969, I started Yale.
So did Afro-American studies.
1970, Cornel West started at Harvard.
Twenty-five years later, we're back to your teaching.
I mean, that's just symptomatic of a larger movement into the middle class by black people.
I read in your book here, I didn't introduce John Edgar Wyden in a couple weeks ago, I just ran my piece two weeks or so ago.
It's an extraordinary belief.
He was only the second African American to win a Rhodes Scholarship.
That's right.
After Alain Locke in 1906.
Locke is the first.
And I said, my God, where have we gone in 25 years?
It's astonishing.
My senior year, four black guys got Rhodes Scholarship.
It's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah, it's amazing.
And all this is part of, I don't know what the… Well, 160 million books you point out as well.
Yeah, that's right.
I mean, that's serious.
Until recently, the American publishing industry didn't think that blacks bought books.
Well, I mean, plus it certainly flies in the face of the whole question of literacy as well.
I'm having a chapter, by the way, on this new book on literacy.
Oh, really?
And I did interview with Sapphire when she was here.
Oh, yeah?
I liked that book.
I did, you know.
Which one, her novel?
Her novel, Push, yeah.
I mean, as a middle-aged white guy, people would, I'm supposed to probably feel like the enemy of that.
No, I excerpted it in my New Yorker.
That's terrific, because the triumph of that book is that this girl learns to read.
It's the awakening realization of literacy, and she really does dramatize this.
And as Sapphire said, you know, she said,
Let's be clear, two-thirds of African Americans are out of poverty.
I think that's the figure she used.
There's still a third.
And that's what we're targeting now.
I mean, I don't know where I'm going with this, but I think what you're saying is 160 million books.
That's a lot of books.
That's something that Norton and everybody else in America should be alert to.
And they are.
More and more.
So it was an ideal time for this anthology to be published.
You know, I'm going to use in my new book, I was not aware at all that Phyllis Whitley was examined by 18 people.
Isn't that amazing?
Where did you find that?
It's in the preface to her book.
They published the letter.
The attestation that I quote is in the first page of her book.
And I really love your trying to imagine what are they going to ask?
What are they going to ask?
It's like an oral exam.
Who was Zeus?
Who was Apollo?
And apparently whatever the questions were, she passed.
She passed.
What a scene that is.
It'd be a great scene for a movie.
But the thing is, they couldn't believe her.
Because she was an African.
So that literacy has always been political.
You know, despite the fact that I'm a formal critic and I love to analyze language use, it would be naive to say that the writings of blacks have not been judged politically since the beginning.
They were.
Phyllis Reed Wheatley didn't write about political themes.
But ironically, hers was, in a way, the most political text of all, because it was determining if Africans were human beings or not.
That's astonishing to me.
And in fact, they didn't publish it here, did they?
No, they published it in London.
But imagine the pressure when you walked into that courthouse.
Of course, Phyllis Wheatley was probably not thinking about all the Africans he was standing for, but she was.
Well, I mean, but when you're the first, Wojcicki Parks probably didn't realize she was making a statement for everybody.
Just quickly, I know you've been quoted on this euronics situation, I guess, today, as Oakland has started out there today.
They backed off today.
Did they back off?
They backed off yesterday.
They backed off.
The Times said yesterday, or the 14th.
I heard something on the radio coming in, I said, whatever.
I don't know.
But your attitude on this?
I think it was wrongheaded and deeply misguided.
I think the King's English is what we have to master.
And when I say the King's English, I don't mean the great tradition of English literature and American literature only, but the tradition of Dr. King and the great oratorical tradition and the great tradition of writing by blacks and speaking by blacks in standard English.
Why, the King didn't, you know, listen to I Have a Dream and I play it 20 times between now and Monday, and it's not about this and that and be that way sometimes.
Shit, it's about standard English, and it's great.
It's one of the greatest...
acts of oratory in American history.
I mean, the English language belongs to us, too.
And we have a great tradition.
And what I want to see is the Norton Anthology used as part of language training and literature training for inner-city black kids, so they can see that we have the vernacular tradition, but we also have the standard English tradition.
And all black people have to be bilingual.
You know, you have to be able to speak the language of the marketplace.
speak black English at home.
It's like Jewish people with Yiddish.
You can't ask IBM to let Yiddish speakers, you know, in there.
And in fact, Yiddish is disappearing.
One of the great regrettable aspects of the assimilation of Jews in America is that Yiddish is a disappearing language.
Sure.
But it doesn't have to be.
It doesn't have to be, which I write about in my book's book.
Black English ain't even about to disappear.
But what we need to do is to
teach that bilingual.
Wow.
To make it easy.
The Oakland School Board was desperate to get three quarters of a million dollars.
And that ain't the way to do it.
And they had to do it by saying this was a foreign language.
And so they took the extraordinarily ridiculous step of claiming that it had a genetic base.
The most ridiculous thing in a very bad report is that we learned this, we inherit this language genetically.
Alaska people made theories like that were called Nazis.
You know, this was just so wrong-headed.
They had bad advisors.
And I love the quote, today's canonical figures can often be in other generations amusing.
It's true, and it means that we are, because, I mean, judgment is always time-specific, cultural-specific.
So, you know, in 1855, if you'd ask a critic who's the greatest American novelist, they might have said Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Nobody would say that today.
She's still important, but not in a literary sense.
Not in a literary sense.
And so much of our anthology consists of writings by writers who are still alive or who have written since 1970.
600 pages are our contemporaries.
It's a horrible pressure to judge.
And an important person in here is anonymous.
Yeah, sure.
I mean, because this is part of the tradition, isn't it?
That's right.
And you do use a comment that, I'm paraphrasing, but black people tried to write their way out of slavery.
They tried to write their way out of slavery, alone among all the slaves in human history.
These people created a genre of literature, the slave narrative.
and use the tools of the master to dismantle the master's house.
That's what they were trying to do.
And, in fact, it was against the law.
It was against the law.
It was a criminal offense to allow black people to... What a more heroic story that a group of people from all over Africa come here, learn a new language, and then try to master that... On the one hand, but then it's also illegal to learn how to read.
Oh, sure, it's illegal to learn.
So they have to do it surreptitiously.
And then pull that off, and using the principles of democracy and the tradition of English literature, try to indict their oppressors, establish their own humanity, and express just feelings about love and death and sorrow and anxiety that every human being feels.
That is a great saga in the history of letters.
It really is.
I mean, it's a romance with books.
Black people are people to book, too.
And one of the great tragedies for me is that this generation...
is not privy to that tradition, and so many of us have forgotten about that tradition.
You know, we used to have people called elocutionists that would show up on Sundays in neighborhoods.
I mean, you'd know they were coming, and they would read Paul Warren Thumbar and Langston Hughes and Booker T. Washington's speeches and stuff, and everybody would get dressed up, and you'd go and listen.
That's wonderful, man.
I mean, in the 50s, in the 40s.
I mean, I saw it in the 50s.
And now that's gone.
I think the first literary society was founded in about 1830.
We had literary societies before we had, we couldn't even buy books.
There's a great book that Oxford published, I put it in my bibliography and I can't think of it right, but this fellow in Philadelphia who gets all the scrapbooks.
Was it Jenner or any of that?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Nick Salvatore edited it from Cornell.
I'm going to get your book, man.
Maybe I'll send you one.
How's that even be better?
Okay.
That's sweet, but I can go buy one.
That's all right.
Let me send you one.
No, no, no.
Listen, we're running out of time.
You're going to call me on Monday.
Okay, I will.
I will call you, and we can chat a little further.
Thank you for doing the story.
Thank you for doing the book.
How's that?
Thank you.
I've got the new book comproft that you've worked on as well.
Oh, great.
Do you want to make a comment on that?
Oh, ask me about that on Monday.
Oh, no, I will.
I got one, I got one.
To me, the Norton Anthology is to African-American literature as
the dictionary of global culture is to what I hope will be a more sophisticated version of multiculturalism.
I mean, our whole point was to say there are people everywhere who have mastered aesthetic forms and thought sublime and beautiful thoughts and have accomplished things which we think every educated citizen in the world should know.
And I think more and more we have to think about
I think it is inevitable that we will be training students to be citizens of a 21st century world culture.
Thank God.
Rather than merely our own little branch, and that's our, however flawed it may be, that was our, the gesture that we were trying to make.
And I'll get this in the piece.
That's why I mention it.
That's great.
I appreciate it.